\chapter{Reconstruction and Selection}%
\label{sec:method}
\section{Triggers}
\label{sec:triggers}

\section{Athena and the CxAOD Framework}
\label{sec:cxaod}
Data recorded by the ATLAS detector is passed through the central collaboration
software framework Athena before entering the analysis level data processing.
\input{05-reconstruction-and-selection/data-flow-chart}
Athena is responsible for the steps shown in figure~\ref{fig:data-flow}. As can
be seen in the figure Athena processes both data recorded from collisions and
Monte-Carlo simulated predictions. Steps up until and including reconstruction
are required to transform the raw or simulated read-out of the detector into
what are known as physics objects. These physics objects correspond to UV and IR
safe descriptions particles and hadron showers e.g. leptons and jets. Given the
initial transverse energy of the collisions (zero) any missing transverse energy
($E^T_{miss}$) is also reconstructed based on the sum of the transverse energy
of all objects in an event, this missing energy indicates the presence of
particles in the event that cannot be detector by any of ATLAS subsystems. The
only particles in the Standard Model for which this is expected are neutrinos.
The files containing the reconstructed physics objects adhere to the ATLAS Event
Data Model (EDM) and are referred to as Analysis Object Data (xAOD). After
reconstruction a part of Athena called the derivation framework is used to
produce skimmed and slimmed xAODs known as Derived xAODs (DxAODs). The reduction
of these files is carried out based on a loose selection criteria, the criteria
used in the VH(bb) analysis are shown in table~\ref{tab:derivations}.

DxAODs are the usual starting point for analysis level software, in the case of
this analysis the CxAOD Framework. Of course xAODs can also be used as the
starting point for analysis they are just larger.
\input{05-reconstruction-and-selection/cxaod-flow}
As in in figure~\ref{fig:cxaod-flow} The CxAOD Framework has two major
components the Maker and the Reader. The job of the maker is to further slim the
data by performing pre-selection cuts and also to apply calibrations which will
be detailed below, the output of the Maker is called a Calibrated xAOD (CxAOD).
The Reader takes a CxAOD as input and performs the analysis event selection, it
can output histograms or nTuples.

The Maker applies selections the selections of each of the three analysis
channels, defined in section~\ref{sec:channels-and-selections}. CxAODs are
produced separately for each of the three channels as the different background
compositions and signal signatures require different optimisation. Pre-selection is
performed on jets based on application of requirements on transverse momentum and
pseudo-rapidity. A tool known as the Jet Vertex Tagger (JVT) is used to remove
jets resulting from pileup from events.



\section{Channel Definitions and Lepton Selections}%
\label{sec:channels-and-selections}

The channels of the VH(bb) analysis are defined by the number of observed
charged leptons ($e$ or $\mu$) in the decay of the vector boson. There is one
channel for the study of WH(bb) decays where the leptonic decay $W \rightarrow
\ell\nu$ yields a single charged lepton. There are two channels for the study of
ZH(bb), the zero lepton channel, $Z \rightarrow \nu\nu$, and the two lepton
channel, $Z \rightarrow \ell\ell$. 

Two classifications of lepton are defined in order to categorise events into the
individual channels of the analysis, these are called VH-loose and VH-signal
electrons, channels are kept orthogonal by requiring different numbers of both
lepton categories. These classifications are defined in
table~\ref{tab:vh-leptons}.
\input{05-reconstruction-and-selection/vh-leptons}

\section{Triggers}
\input{05-reconstruction-and-selection/met_triggers}
\input{05-reconstruction-and-selection/electron_trigger}
\input{05-reconstruction-and-selection/muon_trigger}

\section{Jets}

\section{Overlap Removal}

\section{Missing Transverse Momentum}

\section{Categorisation into Analysis Regions}
\subsection{Top \texorpdfstring{$e \mu$}{e mu} control region}%

\label{sec:topemucr}
\subsection{\texorpdfstring{$\Delta R(b,b)$}{DRbb} Control Regions}%
\label{sec:control-region-defintions}


